# Data centre water consumption

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41545-021-00101-w

## What is this?

This is an open access full-text version of the article detailed below. The
original LaTeX source file is included. [There is a major problem with the
lifespan of references](https://davidmytton.blog/dead-references/), so copies
of all citations are also included in their state when originally accessed.

## Abstract

The information communication technology sector will experience huge growth
over the coming years, with 29.3 billion devices expected online by 2030, up
from 18.4 billion in 2018. To reliably support the online services used by
these billions of users, data centres have been built around the world to
provide the millions of servers they contain with access to power, cooling and
internet connectivity. Whilst the energy consumption of these facilities
regularly receives mainstream and academic coverage, analysis of their water
consumption is scarce. Data centres consume water directly for cooling, in some
cases 57% sourced from potable water, and indirectly through the water
requirements of non-renewable electricity generation. Although in the USA, data
centre water consumption (1.7 billion litres/day) is small compared to total
water consumption (1218 billion litres/day), there are issues of transparency
with less than a third of data centre operators measuring water consumption.
This paper examines the water consumption of data centres, the measurement of
that consumption, highlights the lack of data available to assess water
efficiency, and discusses and where the industry is going in attempts to reduce
future consumptio

## Citation

Mytton, D. Data centre water consumption. npj Clean Water 4, 11 (2021). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41545-021-00101-w

## License

This article is published under the
[CC-BY-4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license. Copies of
the references in this repository are subject to their original content
licenses and are included here under fair-use provisions for education.
